---
slug: chicory-1.0.0-M1
title: 'Announcing Chicory 1.0.0-M1: First Milestone Release'
authors: [evacchi]
tags: [wasm, chicory, release]
---

It's been a while since our **pure-Java WebAssembly runtime** released version [0.0.12][0.0.12], 
so you might say a new release was almost overdue.

In the previous months we concentrated on **correctness** and **spec-compliance** of our WebAssembly runtime; **now** it is time to **harden the codebase** and making it **a solid platform to build upon**.

This release is somewhat special:

- first of all, you will notice we have a **brand-new website**. We are continuously working
on improving the [documentation][docs] to make it a convenient and detailed resource to get started
- but also, this release marks the beginning of our path toward a final **1.0 version**.

The reason why this release took some time is we wanted to get as many thing right. In this release:
- we [updated the public API](#public-api), including [a new way to write host functions](#generated-host-modules)
- some modules are now [marked as experimental](#experimental-modules)
- we are now more confident in [the **Ahead-of-Time** translator](#ahead-of-time-translation):
  this translator is a drop-in replacement for the interpreter, and is 100% compatible 
  with the specs that we support in interpreter mode (`aot` is currently marked as experimental).
- we [improved our WASI implementation](#webassembly-system-interface-improvements)

Let's take a look in detail.

## Public API

In the name of simplicity and readability (but also encapsulation), we refactored a lot of code,
so our **public API** changed a little bit. You will find all the
[updated instructions on the docs][docs]. 

There is now a clearer boundary between `Parser`, `Module`s and `Instance`s:

```java
var module = Parser.parse("path/to/your.wasm");
var instance = Instance.builder(module).build();
```

We have also introduced a new unified mechanism to define host functions
and instantiate collections of related modules together, all at once.
We call this utility the [`Store`][store]:

```java
// instantiate the store
var store = new Store();
// registers a host function in the store
store.addFunction(myFunction);
// create a named `instance` with name `logger`
var instance = store.instantiate("logger", 
    Parser.parse(new File("./logger.wasm")));
```

You can read more about the [`Store` in the docs][store].

### Host Functions

`HostFunction`s have changed their signature. This is probably the biggest surface change 
you will notice. Not only has the order of the arguments changed, but also their types:

```java
// defines `console.log`
var func = new HostFunction(
        "console",
        "log",
        List.of(ValueType.I32, ValueType.I32),
        List.of(),
        (Instance instance, long... args) -> { 
            var len = (int) args[0];
            var offset = (int) args[1];
            var message = instance.memory().readString(offset, len);
            println(message);
            return new long[0];
        });
```

Specifically, you will notice that function arguments and return values are all now arrays of primitive `long`s.
This coincided with a huge refactoring/rewrite of the internals of our engine.

Such `long` values should be intended as raw bits, and should be usually converted back and forth 
to the appropriate types by downcasting or using the [public methods of the `Value` class][value-convert]

For instance, in the example above, we know it is safe to assume 
that those longs were originally widened integers.

We have however introduced a higher-level abstraction for convenience.

## Generated Host Modules

The new `HostFunction` API gives you raw access to the arguments of a function 
as they are represented in the Wasm runtime, but it can be inconvenient to use. 
Thus, we are now also providing an annotation processor to express `HostFunction`s 
in a more ergonomic way.

This feature requires you to depend on the experimental annotation processor:

```xml
    <dependency>
      <groupId>com.dylibso.chicory</groupId>
      <artifactId>host-module-annotations-experimental</artifactId>
      <scope>compile</scope>
    </dependency>
```

You can now annotate a class as `@HostModule("your-wasm-module-name")` 
and export instance members of such a class by annotating them as `@WasmExport`s.

They will generate a `HostFunction` called `your-wasm-module-name.nameOfYourFunction`.

For instance:

```java
@HostModule("wasi_snapshot_preview1")
public final class WasiPreview1 {
    ...
    @WasmExport
    public int fdClose(int fd) {
        ...
    }
}
```

generates a `HostFunction` called `wasi_snapshot_preview1.fd_close`.

As you might have noticed from the example above, we are now using this feature ourselves, 
to implement the [WASI host functions][wasi].

The annotation processor generates a companion `<YourClassName>_ModuleFactory`, with a
static member `<YourClassName>_ModuleFactory#toHostFunctions(<YourClassName>)`.

This static member returns an array of `HostFunction`s that perform the
conversion between raw longs to the type signature you have declared.

You can expose this member in the most convenient way for your end users.

For instance in this case:

```java
@HostModule("wasi_snapshot_preview1")
public final class WasiPreview1 {
    ...

    public HostFunction[] toHostFunctions() {
        return WasiPreview1_ModuleFactory.toHostFunctions(this);
    }
    ...
}
```

### Supported Types

Supported input and output types for `@WasmExport` are primitives `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`.

We also support `String` arguments, provided that they are only passed as an input value,
and they are annotated with `@Buffer`: this tells the code generator to translate
the String value to a pair of integers:
- the first being the index of the beginning of the string in the linear memory
- the second being the length of such a string

For instance:

```java
    @WasmExport
    public int pathFilestatSetTimes(
            int fd,
            int lookupFlags,
            @Buffer String rawPath,
            long accessTime,
            long modifiedTime,
            int fstFlags) {
        ...
    }
```

is effectively translated to the host function `wasi_snapshot_preview1.path_filestat_set_times` with signature:
- `long fd`
- `long lookup_flags`
- **`long raw_path_ptr, long raw_path_size`**
- `long access_time`
- `long modified_time`
- `long fst_flags`
- returns `long[]`

You can additionally indicate `com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.Instance` and 
`com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.Memory` as input arguments; for instance:

```java
@WasmExport
public int fdFdstatGet(Memory memory, int fd, int buf) {
    ...
}
```


## Experimental Modules

We are now clearly marking some modules as `experimental`: while we might still need to introduce a few breaking changes
here and there before the final 1.0 release *throughout the codebase*, we explicitly call a module
`experimental` if it is still under development and might be reworked in the near future.

You might notice that some old modules might have changed their name:
for instance, `aot` is now called `aot-experimental` and the package name has been renamed
from `com.dylibso.chicory.aot` to `com.dylibso.chicory.experimental.aot`

Nonetheless, we invite you to try them and welcome any feedback.

## Ahead of Time Translation

Chicory has been initially developed as a Java interpreter for WebAssembly; but it has soon acquired
a bytecode translator from Wasm bytecode to Java bytecode. This is what we call the **Ahead-of-Time** backend.
The Ahead-of-Time backend is a **drop-in replacement** for the interpreter, and it passes **100% of the same
spec tests** that the interpreter already supports.

You can instantiate a module by explicitly providing a `MachineFactory`. The default `Machine` implementation is the `InterpreterMachine`. You can opt in to the AoT mode by writing:

```java
var module = Parser.parse("path/to/your.wasm");
var instance = Instance.builder(m)
        .withMatchineFactory(AotMachine::new)
        .build();
```

Provide that you add the dependency:

```xml
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.dylibso.chicory</groupId>
        <artifactId>aot-experimental</artifactId>
      </dependency>
```

This will translate every module you instantiate into Java bytecode on-the-fly and in-memory. 
The resulting code is usually expected to evaluate faster and consuming less memory. This was
already present in our last release.

With 1.0.0-M1 we are also introducing a new mode of execution: build-time code generation.
The idea is that this mode of execution will allow you to run Wasm binaries without depending
on our Wasm runtime: 
- this improves startup time because the translation occurs only once,
when you are packaging your application
- it virtually allows you to distribute Wasm modules
as self-contained jars, making it a convenient way to distribute software that 
was not originally meant to run on the Java platform
- it still maintains the same performance properties as the in-memory compiler (in fact, 
the compilation backend is virtually the same)

The translation is performed during your build using a [Maven plug-in][aot-maven-plugin].

### Build-Time Ahead-of-Time Translation

This mode of execution requires to configure a Maven plug-in. 

[An example can be found in the Chicory codebase][chicory-wabt]. The [`wabt`][wabt] suite of tools allows 
to manipulate Wasm bytecode in a number of ways. 
For instance, the `wat2wasm` tool takes WAT source files (written in "WebAssembly Text Format")
and translate them into Wasm. 

The `wabt` tool set is written in C++, and the tools can be compiled to Wasm themselves. 
So, in the [`wabt`][chicory-wabt] submodule in the Chicory codebase, 
we translate the Wasm version of `wat2wasm` into Java bytecode so that we can invoke it without 
calling a native executable.

```xml
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>com.dylibso.chicory</groupId>
        <artifactId>aot-maven-plugin-experimental</artifactId>
        <executions>
            ...
            <execution>
                <id>wat2wasm</id>
                <goals>
                    <goal>wasm-aot-gen</goal>
                </goals>
                <configuration>
                    <!-- Translate the Wasm binary `wat2wasm` into bytecode -->
                    <wasmFile>src/main/resources/wat2wasm</wasmFile>
                    <!-- Generate the following class file as a result -->
                    <name>com.dylibso.chicory.wabt.Wat2WasmModule</name>
                </configuration>
            </execution>
          ...
        </executions>
      </plugin>
    ...
    </plugins>
    ...
  </build>
```

Refer to [the `wabt` module in the Chicory codebase][chicory-wabt] to see how we expose the `wat2wasm` tool
as a library.

## WebAssembly System Interface Improvements

Besides using the new Host Module annotation processor, we introduced many more [WASI functions][wasi]. 
This improves the compatibility of our engine with the output of the majority of compilers targeting `wasip1`; 
at this point, the most used functions should be all supported. Refer to the [WASI docs][wasi] for details.

## Conclusion

Chicory has come a long way since its first release, and we have also to thank all of our wonderful
[**contributors**][contributors]: without you we would not be where we are today!

There is still some way to go before our final release, but we are already looking forward to what you will be building. 
Check out Chicory 1.0.0-M1 right now and let us know what you think!

[0.0.12]: https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/releases/tag/0.0.12
[docs]: /docs/
[store]: /docs/usage/linking
[wasi]: /docs/usage/wasi
[value-convert]: https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/blob/c369d287f724b2297211c6dd02e7bbaeaaed321a/wasm/src/main/java/com/dylibso/chicory/wasm/types/Value.java#L26-L44
[aot-maven-plugin]: https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/tree/16c7fe4d5cd3d7365b8bc78425d968af12f61dba/aot-maven-plugin
[chicory-wabt]: https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/tree/16c7fe4d5cd3d7365b8bc78425d968af12f61dba/wabt
[wabt]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt
[contributors]: https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/graphs/contributors



